[pip][design] PIP-278: Support pluggable topic compaction service (#20624)
apache/pulsar: pip/pip-278.md

# Motivation

Currently, the implementation of Pulsar Topic Compaction is fixed and does not support custom strategy, which limits users from using more Compactor policies in their applications.

For example, we need to parse the Kafka format then compact message in Kop, but the current implementation of Pulsar topic compaction does not support this feature.

Another we also need to support write the compacted data anywhere, S3, in columnar format, or even partitioning.

So we need to make  the whole topic compaction service (include Write API & Read API) pluggable to support more customize compaction service implementation.

# Goals

## In Scope

* Abstract topic compaction service interface and support topic compaction service pluggable.

* Migrate the current implementation to a new interface implementation.

* Makes existing tests compatible with new implementations.

## Out of Scope

For CompactorMetrics, keep the current implementation and don't define related method in topic compaction service interface, in the future will use the `Otel` interface or other mertics API instead.

# High Level Design

> To make the whole topic compaction service pluggable, we need to abstract `TopicCompactionService` interface, it can provide the capability that the compactor has and provide the read API to read entries from compacted data.

Reviewer: Would you mind putting an Inheritance chart to help others understand this part? :)

Author: Yeah, I will add a class diagram

# Goals

## In Scope

* Abstract topic compaction service interface and support topic compaction service pluggable.

* Migrate the current implementation to a new interface implementation.

* Makes existing tests compatible with new implementations.

## Out of Scope

* For CompactorMetrics, keep the current implementation and don't define related method in topic compaction service interface, in the future will use the `Otel` interface or other mertics API instead.

* For `StrategicTwoPhaseCompactor`, it's out of the scope for regular compaction. It's only used for the load balancer. So it won't change.

# High Level Design

To make the whole topic compaction service pluggable, we need to abstract `TopicCompactionService` interface, it can provide the capability that the compactor has and provide the read API to read entries from compacted data.

We should combine `CompactedTopicImpl` and `TwoPhaseCompactor` to pulsar implementation of topic compaction service and make behavior with the current implementation consistent.

# Detailed Design

## Design & Implementation Details

* Define a standard TopicCompactionService interface.

  ```java

>   public interface TopicCompactionService {

Reviewer: Should we consider defining some exceptions or status codes here?

Author: It doesn't seem to be necessary, we don't have any special handling of exceptions for these methods

      /**
       * Compact the topic.
       * Topic Compaction is a key-based retention mechanism. it will keep the most recent value for a given key and
       * user will read compacted data from TopicCompactionService.
       *
       * @return a future that will be completed when the compaction is done.
       */
      CompletableFuture<Void> compact();

      /**
       * Read the compacted entries from the topic.
       *
       * @param startPosition         the position to start reading from.
       * @param numberOfEntriesToRead the number of entries to read.
       * @return a future that will be completed with the list of entries, this list can is null.
       */

>       CompletableFuture<List<Entry>> readCompactedEntries(PositionImpl startPosition, int numberOfEntriesToRead);

Reviewer: Should we consider adding `@NonNull` annotation to interface parameters to clarify it? :)

Author: Add `@NonNull` annotation for `List<Entry>`? It seems to be unable to add an annotation for the Generic Types

Reviewer: add annotation to `PositionImpl startPosition`

Author: Oh, Good idea

      /**
       * Read the last compacted entry from the TopicCompactionService.
       *
       * @return a future that will be completed with the compacted last entry, this entry can is null.
       */

>       CompletableFuture<Entry> readCompactedLastEntry();

Reviewer: It looks like ` CompletableFuture<Entry> readCompactedLastEntry();` includes `CompletableFuture<PositionImpl> getCompactedLastPosition();`? 

The compacted last entry includes its position. Isn't it? :)

Author: Yes, but sometimes the cost of `getCompactedLastPosition` may be small or can get it synchronous.
Separating them is for performance.

Reviewer: Got it.

      /**
       * Get the last compacted position from the TopicCompactionService.
       *
       * @return a future that will be completed with the last compacted position, this position can is null.
       */
      CompletableFuture<PositionImpl> getCompactedLastPosition();
  }
  ```

* Define a standard CompactionServiceFactory interface to manage `TopicCompactionService`.

  ```java
  public interface CompactionServiceFactory extends AutoCloseable {
  
      CompletableFuture<Void> initialize(PulsarService pulsarService);
  
      CompletableFuture<TopicCompactionService> newTopicCompactionService(String topic);
  }
  ```

* Implement `PulsarCompactionServiceFactory` and `PulsarCompactionService`

* Combining `CompactedTopicImpl` and `TwoPhaseCompactor` to `PulsarTopicCompactionService`

* Rename `CompactorSubscription` to `PulsarCompactorSubscription`, since it is only applicable to the implementation of Pulsar.

> * For CompactorMetrics keep the current implementation and it only support `PulsarTopicCompactionService` currently , in the future will use the `Otel` API or other mertics API  instead, and customize compactedService should implement it.

Reviewer: Hi，@asafm 
I remember you have been working on the metrics lately. What do you think of the place?  thanks! :)

# Background knowledge

> Apache Pulsar is a distributed messaging system that supports multiple messaging protocols and storage methods. Among them, Pulsar Topic Compaction is a mechanism to clean up duplicate messages in topics to reduce storage space and improve system efficiency.

Reviewer 2: It should be a wrong description of the topic compaction. It is not for removing the duplicated messages. The message deduplication was. The topic compaction provides a key-based data retention mechanism that allows you only to keep the most recent message associated with that key.

Reviewer 2: And we should also add the topic compaction use case of the new load balancer. It has improved the topic compaction only to keep the first value of the key.

And we should also explain if the new compaction service will affect the load balancer or not.

Author: Ok, I fix description of the topic compaction

More topic compaction details can be found in [Pulsar Topic Compaction](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/concepts-topic-compaction/).

# Motivation

Currently, the implementation of Pulsar Topic Compaction is fixed and does not support custom strategy, which limits users from using more Compactor policies in their applications.

> For example, we need to parse the Kafka format then compact message in Kop, but the current implementation of Pulsar topic compaction does not support this feature.

Reviewer 2: We should explain why Pulsar topic compaction can't work with KoP. Actually, it can work with pulsar format data in KoP, but it can't work with Kafka format data since the data written to the entry is in Kafka format. The Pulsar compactor doesn't aware of Kafka format data. And it doesn't make sense to support Kafka format data handling in Pulsar.

Author: Yesh, I add some description to explain why Pulsar topic compaction can't work with KoP.

> Another we also need to support write the compacted data anywhere, S3, in columnar format, or even partitioning.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be a further consideration. We don't have any discussion about Pulsar NEED to support S3, columnar format, or partitioning.

# Detailed Design

## Design & Implementation Details

* Define a standard TopicCompactionService interface.

  ```java
  public interface TopicCompactionService {
      /**
       * Compact the topic.
       * Topic Compaction is a key-based retention mechanism. it will keep the most recent value for a given key and
       * user will read compacted data from TopicCompactionService.
       *
       * @return a future that will be completed when the compaction is done.
       */
      CompletableFuture<Void> compact();

      /**
       * Read the compacted entries from the TopicCompactionService.
       *
       * @param startPosition         the position to start reading from.
       * @param numberOfEntriesToRead the number of entries to read.
       * @return a future that will be completed with the list of entries, this list can is null.
       */
      CompletableFuture<List<Entry>> readCompactedEntries(@NonNUll Position startPosition, int numberOfEntriesToRead);

      /**
       * Read the last compacted entry from the TopicCompactionService.
       *
       * @return a future that will be completed with the compacted last entry, this entry can is null.
       */

>       CompletableFuture<Entry> readCompactedLastEntry();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      CompletableFuture<Entry> readLastCompactedEntry();
```

      /**
       * Get the last compacted position from the TopicCompactionService.
       *
       * @return a future that will be completed with the last compacted position, this position can is null.
       */

>       CompletableFuture<Position> getCompactedLastPosition();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      CompletableFuture<Position> getLastCompactedPosition();
```

  ```

* Define a standard CompactionServiceFactory interface to manage `TopicCompactionService`.

  ```java
  public interface CompactionServiceFactory extends AutoCloseable {
  
      CompletableFuture<Void> initialize(PulsarService pulsarService);
  
      CompletableFuture<TopicCompactionService> newTopicCompactionService(String topic);
  }
  ```

* Implement `PulsarCompactionServiceFactory` and `PulsarCompactionService`

* Combining `CompactedTopicImpl` and `TwoPhaseCompactor` to `PulsarTopicCompactionService`

* Rename `CompactorSubscription` to `PulsarCompactorSubscription`, since it is only applicable to the implementation of Pulsar.

* For CompactorMetrics keep the current implementation, and it only supports `PulsarTopicCompactionService` currently, in the future will use the `Otel` API or other metrics API instead, and customize TopicCompactedService should implement it.

* Fix tests and makes them compatible with new implementations.

## Public-facing Changes

### Configuration

broker.conf
```
compactionServiceFactoryClassName=org.apache.pulsar.compaction.PulsarCompactionServiceFactory
```

# Backward & Forward Compatability

## Revert

## Upgrade

# Alternatives

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we have alternatives.

- Only make the compactor pluggable
- Make the compaction data serializer and deserializer pluggable

But they are not good for the long-term view of Pulsar

Author: Yeah, I add this part

# Background knowledge

Apache Pulsar is a distributed messaging system that supports multiple messaging protocols and storage methods. 
Among them, Pulsar Topic Compaction provides a key-based data retention mechanism that allows you only to keep the most recent message associated with that key to reduce storage space and improve system efficiency.

> Another, the Topic Compaction of new load balancer changed the strategy of compaction, it will only to keep the first value of the key.

Reviewer 2: Please help add a link of the proposal of new load balancer so that users can go to the proposal to check the details.

> Another, the Topic Compaction of new load balancer changed the strategy of compaction, it will only to keep the first value of the key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another Pulsar's internal use case, the Topic Compaction of new load balancer changed the strategy of compaction, it will only to keep the first value of the key.
```

# High Level Design

To make the whole topic compaction service pluggable, we need to abstract `TopicCompactionService` interface, it can provide the capability that the compactor has and provide the read API to read entries from compacted data.

We should combine `CompactedTopicImpl` and `TwoPhaseCompactor` to pulsar implementation of topic compaction service and make behavior with the current implementation consistent.

Class Diagram of core class:
![pip-278-1.png](images/pip-278-1.png)

# Detailed Design

## Design & Implementation Details

* Define a standard TopicCompactionService interface.

  ```java
  public interface TopicCompactionService {
      /**
       * Compact the topic.
       * Topic Compaction is a key-based retention mechanism. it will keep the most recent value for a given key and
       * user will read compacted data from TopicCompactionService.
       *
       * @return a future that will be completed when the compaction is done.
       */
      CompletableFuture<Void> compact();

      /**
       * Read the compacted entries from the TopicCompactionService.
       *
       * @param startPosition         the position to start reading from.

>        * @param numberOfEntriesToRead the number of entries to read.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       * @param numberOfEntriesToRead the maximum number of entries to read.
```

I guess you want to mean the "maximum" number of entries. If not, you should explain the behavior that what if there are not enough entries to read.

Author: Yeah, mean the "maximum" number of entries.

Author: Fixed.

       * @return a future that will be completed with the list of entries, this list can is null.
       */

>       CompletableFuture<List<Entry>> readCompactedEntries(@NonNUll Position startPosition, int numberOfEntriesToRead);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      CompletableFuture<List<Entry>> readCompactedEntries(Position startPosition, int numberOfEntriesToRead);
```

We should not add a `NonNull` annotation on a interface. If the annotation comes from lombok, it means a null check will be performed, see https://projectlombok.org/features/NonNull.

Instead, we should document the exact behavior when `startPosition` is `null` via a `@throws` or `@implNote` annotation.

Author: > We should not add a NonNull annotation on a interface. If the annotation comes from lombok, it means a null check will be performed, see https://projectlombok.org/features/NonNull.

`Nonnull` means [`javax.annotation.Nonnull`](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/validation/constraints/NotNull.html), it only documents this element must not be null

      /**
       * Read the last compacted entry from the TopicCompactionService.
       *

>        * @return a future that will be completed with the compacted last entry, this entry can is null.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       * @return a future that will be completed with the compacted last entry, this entry can be null.
```

Correct the grammar.

       */
      CompletableFuture<Entry> readLastCompactedEntry();

      /**
       * Get the last compacted position from the TopicCompactionService.
       *

>        * @return a future that will be completed with the last compacted position, this position can is null.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       * @return a future that will be completed with the last compacted position, this position can be null.
```

       */

>       CompletableFuture<Position> getLastCompactedPosition();

Reviewer 3: It's confusing that we have both `readLastCompactedEntry` and `getLastCompactedPosition` because we have a `Entry#getPosition` method to get the position of an entry.

Could you explain the difference between:

```java
readLastCompactedEntry().thenApply(Entry::getPosition)
```

and 

```java
getLastCompactedPosition()
```

Author: Please ref to: https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/20624#discussion_r1236177136

# Background knowledge

Apache Pulsar is a distributed messaging system that supports multiple messaging protocols and storage methods. 
Among them, Pulsar Topic Compaction provides a key-based data retention mechanism that allows you only to keep the most recent message associated with that key to reduce storage space and improve system efficiency.

> Another Pulsar's internal use case, the Topic Compaction of new load balancer changed the strategy of compaction, it will only to keep the first value of the key. More detail please see: [PIP-215](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/issues/18099)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another Pulsar's internal use case, the Topic Compaction of the new load balancer, changed the strategy of compaction. It only keeps the first value of the key. For more detail, see [PIP-215](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/issues/18099).
```

More topic compaction details can be found in [Pulsar Topic Compaction](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/concepts-topic-compaction/).

# Motivation

> Currently, the implementation of Pulsar Topic Compaction is fixed and does not support custom strategy, which limits users from using more Compactor policies in their applications.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Currently, the implementation of Pulsar Topic Compaction is fixed and does not support customized strategy, which limits users from using more Compactor policies in their applications.
```
Do you mean this?

For example, current topic compaction can work with pulsar format data in KoP, but it can't work with Kafka format data since the data written to the entry is in Kafka format. 

> The Pulsar compactor doesn't aware of Kafka format data. And it doesn't make sense to support Kafka format data handling in Pulsar. We need implement a pluggable compactor to support Kafka format data handling in KoP.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Pulsar compactor doesn't aware of Kafka format data. And it doesn't make sense to support Kafka format data handling in Pulsar. We need to implement a pluggable compactor to support Kafka format data handling in KoP.
```

> Another long-term consideration is that we may need to support write the compacted data anywhere, S3, in columnar format, or even partitioning.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another long-term consideration is that we may need to support writing the compacted data anywhere, S3, in columnar format, or even partitioning.
```

> So we need to make  the whole topic compaction service (include Write API & Read API) pluggable to support more customize compaction service implementation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
So we need to make the whole topic compaction service (including Write API & Read API) pluggable to support more customize compaction service implementation.
```

# Goals

## In Scope

* Abstract topic compaction service interface and support topic compaction service pluggable.

* Migrate the current implementation to a new interface implementation.

* Makes existing tests compatible with new implementations.

## Out of Scope

> * For CompactorMetrics, keep the current implementation and don't define related method in topic compaction service interface, in the future will use the `Otel` interface or other mertics API instead.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* For CompactorMetrics, keep the current implementation and don't define related methods in the topic compaction service interface. In the future, it will use the `Otel` interface or other metrics API instead.
```

* For `StrategicTwoPhaseCompactor`, it's out of the scope for regular compaction. It's only used for the load balancer. So it won't change.

# High Level Design

> To make the whole topic compaction service pluggable, we need to abstract `TopicCompactionService` interface, it can provide the capability that the compactor has and provide the read API to read entries from compacted data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To make the whole topic compaction service pluggable, we need to abstract `TopicCompactionService` interface. It ensures that the compactor provided a read API to read entries from compacted data.
```

Is this way more concise?

Author: `TopicCompactionService` provides both the capability that the compactor and read entries from compacted data.

> We should combine `CompactedTopicImpl` and `TwoPhaseCompactor` to pulsar implementation of topic compaction service and make behavior with the current implementation consistent.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We should combine `CompactedTopicImpl` and `TwoPhaseCompactor` to the Pulsar implementation of the topic compaction service and make behavior with the current implementation consistent.
```

Class Diagram of core class:
![pip-278-1.png](images/pip-278-1.png)

# Detailed Design

## Design & Implementation Details

* Define a standard TopicCompactionService interface.

  ```java
  import javax.annotation.Nonnull;
  
  public interface TopicCompactionService {
      /**
       * Compact the topic.

>        * Topic Compaction is a key-based retention mechanism. it will keep the most recent value for a given key and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
       * Topic Compaction is a key-based retention mechanism. It keeps the most recent value for a given key and
```

>        * user will read compacted data from TopicCompactionService.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
       * user reads compacted data from TopicCompactionService.
```

       */
      CompletableFuture<Position> getLastCompactedPosition();
  }
  ```

* Define a standard CompactionServiceFactory interface to manage `TopicCompactionService`.

  ```java
  public interface CompactionServiceFactory extends AutoCloseable {

    /**
     * Initialize the compaction service factory.
     *
     * @param pulsarService
     *            the pulsar service instance
     * @return a future represents the initialization result
     */
    CompletableFuture<Void> initialize(PulsarService pulsarService);

    /**
     * Create a new topic compaction service for topic.
     *
     * @param topic
     *            the topic name
     * @return a future represents the topic compaction service
     */
    CompletableFuture<TopicCompactionService> newTopicCompactionService(String topic);
  }
  ```

* Implement `PulsarCompactionServiceFactory` and `PulsarCompactionService`

* Combining `CompactedTopicImpl` and `TwoPhaseCompactor` to `PulsarTopicCompactionService`

* Rename `CompactorSubscription` to `PulsarCompactorSubscription`, since it is only applicable to the implementation of Pulsar.

> * For CompactorMetrics keep the current implementation, and it only supports `PulsarTopicCompactionService` currently, in the future will use the `Otel` API or other metrics API instead, and customize TopicCompactedService should implement it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* For `CompactorMetrics`: keep the current implementation. Currently, it only supports `PulsarTopicCompactionService`. In the future, it will use the `Otel` API or other metrics API instead, and customize TopicCompactedService should implement it.
```
1. Do you mean this?

2. What do you intend to convey? "and customize TopicCompactedService should implement it."

Author: > What do you intend to convey? "and customize TopicCompactedService should implement it."

Customized `TopicCompactedService` should implement the `Otel` API or other metrics API.

Reviewer 4: Then that sentence can be:
 "In the future, `CompactorMetrics` will use the `Otel` API or other metrics API. Customized `TopicCompactedService` should implement the Otel API or other metrics API."

It's better to show the objects explicitly rather than using a fuzzy word like `it`. Users do not what does "it" refer to.

Author: Thanks, I improve it.

* Fix tests and makes them compatible with new implementations.

## Public-facing Changes

### Configuration

broker.conf
```
compactionServiceFactoryClassName=org.apache.pulsar.compaction.PulsarCompactionServiceFactory
```

# Backward & Forward Compatability

## Revert

## Upgrade

# Alternatives

* Only make the compactor pluggable

> * Make the compaction data serializer and deserializer pluggable in current pulsar implementation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Make the compaction data serializer and deserializer pluggable in the current Pulsar implementation.
```
